iWho’s a Settler Colonist Now?

Why should we care about who qualifies as "indigenous" in some place and who doesn’t? 

Well, the basic idea is that the indigenous people were there first, and some other group came along later, and pushed
them aside. In recognition for having suffered an historical injustice, the indigenous people are entitled to certain
rights and protections, or so the prevalent theory goes.

So, then, who is indigenous? My Meriam-Webster dictionary has the following definition:
"indigenous: of or relating to the earliest known inhabitants of a place…"

This is a simple, fairly straightforward definition to apply. Of course, given new archaeological evidence, we might
find that some previously unknown inhabitants had been in some locale before the people who up till then had been
thought to be the indigenous population. But we would not expect that to happen very often.

However, I was recently at a lecture by Marian Pastor Roces on Austronesian culture. She mentioned that the Philippines
were first settled 47,000 years ago. The Austronesians arrived on the islands 4000 years ago and almost completely
displaced the people who had been there. (The original inhabitants left their trace in the "Negritos" of the islands,
who, nevertheless, have mixed with Austronesians and speak Austronesian languages.) Yet several times later in the
lecture she referred to the artifacts produced by the Austronesians as "indigenous" Filipino culture.

Similarly, all of the languages of northern India are languages of invading Indo-Europeans, who migrated to an area that
had already given birth to the Indus Valley civilization. The subcontinent was then invaded again by nomadic Muslims.
Thus, the British were the third main outside culture to dominate India.


In Southern Africa, as Wikipedia notes, "[Southwards moving Bantu people] displaced, conquered, and absorbed the
original Khoisan, Khoikhoi and San peoples." Dutch settlers often allied with the indigenous (?) people resisting Bantu
incursions. Nevertheless, several paragraphs later, Wikipedia describes the people living in South Africa as the Dutch,
the English, and the indigenous people… despite the fact that many of the people lumped into the indigenous category
were recent invaders attempting to subjugate be actual indigenous people.




Ireland: Celts third millennium BC

The importance tied to the issue of just two is indigenous, and who is a settler colonialist has been raised to even
greater prominence by the current conflict in Gaza, where both sides try to contend they are "more indigenous" than the
other. That such an issue could possibly have any definitive answer in a region like the Middle East history of which
has been characterized by thousands and thousands of years of conquests and migrations, is simply absurd. 

In general, conquerors are excused from being "settler colonialists" and allowed to be "indigenous" so long as they are
not European conquerors. The Irish Celts are an exception here, probably because they were conquered by the English, who
are the bête noire of the people who like to complain about "settler colonialism" (although the Israelis may be
challenging them for that top spot).

The paths of men are twisted, and any attempt to draw a simple morality play out of that tangle must do violence to
historical reality. We can’t put everyone back where they "came from," or all 8 billion of us would have to crowd into
East Africa. We can’t restore all lands to their original inhabitants: who will get the Philippines? Should we assign
ownership by what percentage of Negrito DNA each person has?

We cannot make the past more just than it was: it lies beyond our reach. It is only the future that we can make more
just. And I suggest that trying to assign blame to living people for things done by their remote ancestors is a barrier,
rather than a step, towards doing so.









## Notes



Then the Moghuls


The Italic people invaded Italy


The Zulu invaded South Africa


The Barbarous Years


Not one of the descendants of settler colonists actually decided to be born where they were.


Patrick Wolfe was himself a "settler colonist," moving from his native England to Australia!
