Against "Conservative Art"


Recently, Mary Harrington wrote: "By contrast, if by "art" you understand (as I do) a fusion of moral, aesthetic and
political impulses..."


Now, I do not deny that often times, a miscellany of activities is going on nearly simultaneously
in some person's life. One may be making love to one's spouse, while also watching a golf tournament on TV, and planning
that evening's dinner. But that does not mean that making love *consists* of those various activities. Similarly,
someone may be painting, while alternately attending to aesthetic, political, and moral ends. But that no more makes
such a miscellany the essence of art does the previous miscellany consist of the essence of sexual intercourse.


Conservative art is bad not because conservatives have bad taste or lack imagination, but because the fairy term denote
it's a mongrel beast of low breeding: art is its own species, as is politics, "conservative art" tries to force them to
produce fertile offspring. " Progressive art" of course has the exact same problem: it merely has the advantage over
conservative art in being fashionable.

There is nothing preventing someone of conservative political inclinations from producing great art, except the
misapprehension that their art must somehow support conservative politics. And so may someone of progressive political
inclination produce great art. Nevertheless, conservatives may actually have an advantage here, and then at least some
varieties of conservatives are less committed to the idea that everything must have political implications than are most
progressives.


Oakeshott


but it is to be found much earlier in Aquinas. As St. Thomas was channeled by James Joyce:

"The tragic emotion, in fact, is a face looking two ways, towards terror and towards pity, both of which are phases of
it. You see I use the word arrest. I mean that the tragic emotion is static. Or rather the dramatic emotion is. The
feelings excited by improper art are kinetic, desire or loathing. Desire urges us to possess, to go to something;
loathing urges us to abandon, to go from something. The arts which excite them, pornographical or didactic, are
therefore improper arts. The esthetic emotion (I used the general term) is therefore static. The mind is arrested and
raised above desire and loathing."



But why can't someone do both at once, try to make the case for conservatism while producing an excellent work of art? Well, no man may serve two masters.

Imagine you are the manager of an NBA basketball team. And you set the team the simultaneous goals of:

1. Winning the NBA championship
2. Hiring as many disabled players as possible.

It should be clear that to the extent you focus on one of these goals, you are less likely to succeed at the other. And
so it is with someone creating a novel, or play, or movie: to the extent their focus is on making a case for
conservatism, it is not on making great art.

The same is true, of course for progressive art. To the extent that progressive art is actually "better" and
conservative art, I think it is largely the effect of ambition: for a budding artist with talent, will be obvious that
mixing progressivism with their art will advance them in their profession, while even a whiff of conservatism could...

None of this is to say that even the greatest artists do not mingle other concerns into their art, nor am i trying to
set up some rule that they should never do so. In fact, perhaps a certain sprinkling of non-aesthetic concerns through a
work of art serve to enhance its aesthetic character, the same way that a few bits of anchovie may make an otherwise
edible salad more interesting. 




If someone of a conservative disposition wishes to produce excellent art that, in a certain sense, supports conservatism, the best they can do is to focus simply on producing excellent art. And this will illustrate the point that conservatives are not entirely obsessed with politics, as many progressives are.


