# The New Alchemists


AI researchers have achieved genuine breakthroughs in the ability of computers
to process language and images over the last decade. But along with these
genuine technical accomplishments comes what Mircea Eliade refers to as
"ideology" that describes what their enterprise is all about.

For instance, Elon Musk [has
predicted](https://www.ft.com/content/027b133f-f7e3-459d-95bf-8afd815ae23d)
that AI will "overtake" human intelligence "next year."


Thus, it may be of interest to look into the past, at some similar enterprises
achieving genuine technical breakthroughs, accompanied by an ideology of
dubious validity. In doing so, we will make extensive use of Eliade's book *The
Forge and the Crucible*. In it, he traces how the ideology associated with
metallurgy and mining gradually gave birth to alchemy. (I don't particularly
like this use of "ideology," but, having been unable to come up with a better
word, I will use Eliade's term.)



Eliade writes, of primitive metallurgy, "Very early on we are confronted with
the notion that ores "grow" in the belly of the Earth after the manner of
embryos." (8)

Much in the way that large language models are supposed to be "learning" as
they are being programmed.

8-9:
What what the smelter, Smith and alchemist have in common is that all three
they claim to a particular magico-religious experience in their relations with
matter; this experience is their monopoly and its secret is transmitted through
the initiatory rights of their trades. All three work on a Matter which they
hold to be at once alive and sacred, and in their labours they pursue the
transformation of matter, its perfection and its transmutation.

11: soteriological function of alchemy 

20: magical rock crystal: silicon!

24: the image, the symbol and the right anticipate – sometimes even make possible – the practical applications of a discovery.


29: the tools of the Smith also shared the sacred quality. The hammer,
thebellows, and the anvil are revealed to be animate miraculous objects. They
were regarded as capable of operating by their own magico-religious force,
unassisted by the smith.

Much like the LLM today!


63: the transformation of holy matter (which is what metal is) demands for its accomplishment the sacrifice of a human being


75: to sum up: in the symbols and rites accompanying metallurgical operations
there comes into being the idea of an active collaboration of man and nature,
perhaps even the belief that man, by his own work, is capable of superseding
the process of nature.


The ubiquity of alchemy


It is of note that the sexual imagery, the idea of the union of male and female
elements, is not explicit in the soteriological AI literature
????


Isaac Newton and alchemy

https://www.neh.gov/humanities/2011/januaryfebruary/feature/newton-the-last-magician

Consider this line in a recipe for "sophic mercury," which dissolved gold and
allowed the precious metal to "vegetate" and mature into the philosopher's
stone: "Marry [sulfur] with , that is our [mercury] which is impregnated with
must be espoused with our gold then hast thou two sulphurs married & two s of
one of[f]spring whose father is the [gold] & [silver] the mother."

This led Keynes, who was responsible for bringing to light Newton's devotion to
alchemy, to call Newton "the last of the magicians": but Keynes himself might
be considered a latter day magician, his theories transforming profligate
spending and useless work into prosperity! (Eliade saw the "systems of
political economy" as carrying forward the alchemist's dream.)

Roger Bacon wrote about a "medicine, which gets rid of impurities and all
blemishes from the most base metal, can wash unclean things from the body and
prevents decay of the body to such an extent that it prolongs life by several
centuries" 167

This is analogies to the transhumanist dream of "uploading" human consciousness
into a machine not subject to physical decay.


"in taking upon himself the responsibility of changing Nature, man put himself
in the place of Time; that which would have required millennia or aeons to
'ripen' in the depths of the earth, the metallurgist and alchemist claim to be
able to achieve in a few weeks." 169

Similarly, the AI alchemist tries to duplicate an evolution of consciousness
that took hundreds of millions of years in the time it takes to train an LLM.


Eliade explicitly recognizes that the alchemist's dream has not died with the
death of alchemy: " the idea of a new Epoch, crystallized around the myth of
infinite progress and boosted by the experimental sciences, and the progress of
industrialization which dominated and inspired the whole of the 19th century,
takes up and carries forward... the millennary dream of the alchemist." 172

" visionaries myth of the perfection... of Nature survives, in camouflage form,
in the pathetic program of the industrial societies, whose aim is the total
Transmutation of nature" 172


No one today would suggest that, in order to appreciate stainless steel cutlery
or iron grill work, we must acknowledge the occult properties of iron, or that
to form a metal alloy requires sexual purity on the part of the metallurgist.
Nor would we have to buy into a theory of how to marry mercury and sulphur to
produce offspring to appreciate Newton's theory of gravity or the calculus.

Similarly, we can appreciate the genuine technical advances being achieved by
today's AI shamans without buying into their occult fantasies of creating
"spiritual machines" by chanting magical incantations over silicon crystals.





