# Has cancel culture been canceled?


Marko Elez, a software engineer working in Elon Musk's DOGE, was recently "canceled" due to some offensive remarks, and
then uncanceled the next day.

Elez said some very obnoxious things, such as "Normalize Indian hate," and "Just for the record, I was racist before it
was cool."

But Musk has said he will hire Elez back, remarking "To err is human, to forgive divine."

Was this an indication that "cancel culture" is over?

Meanwhile, Danielle Salinas, a medical assistant at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, was called out by Andy
Ngo for posts approving violence against government officials she does not like, which apparently means pretty much
anyone to the right of her. One commenter on Ngo's post said, "Cancel culture is alive and well I guess."

Is it hypocritical for people who attacked "cancel culture" to call out Salinas for her statements?

(https://x.com/MrAndyNgo/status/1888387660634575159)

To answer these questions, let us take a look at just what people were objecting to when they complained about about
cancel culture.

The perfectly justified complaints about cancel culture have a risen in cases where an employee merely expresses a view
on some topical issue, an issue having nothing to do with his organization's core mission, but which is deemed out of
bounds by people in power within the organization. 

Let us look at a paradigmatic case of bad cancel culture: the firing of Brendan Eich from Netscape. He had invented
JavaScript, which is now one of the most popular programming languages in the world.

A number of years ago, the inventor of JavaScript, was forced out of his position as Mozilla when it was revealed that
he had donated to a campaign attempting block gay marriage in California. I think this is a clear example of the cancel
culture that people want to see canceled: this person simply had an opinion that was unpopular with progressives in the
tech industry. Rather than exhibiting the tolerance that they so loudly proclaim as their special virtue, they showed
themselves to be completely intolerant of his simply disagreeing with them on this issue. It is worth noting that Eich
himself never recommended that people who did support gay marriage be dismissed from his company.

Of course, the situation is quite different if an employee advocates views that run directly counter to the goals of the
organization that they are working for. If someone posts "all Republicans are Nazis," while employed by the Republican
national committee, it is perfectly justified to fire that person. In that case, they would be putting themselves
directly in opposition to the organization's stated goals. Similarly, someone working for a Catholic charity can
legitimately be fired for advocating for abortion rights, just as it would be legitimate to fire an employee of an
abortion rights advocacy group for publicly declaring that "abortion is murder." And even some completely legal actions
are perfectly legitimate reasons for dismissal from a group if those actions directly counter the group's raison d'etre:
if you work for the worldwide council on promoting veganism, but are found enjoying a 32-ounce porterhouse steak at
Peter Luger's, you have no legitimate complaint if you lose your job.


Are there any legitimate limits an organization might place on an employee's speech and action outside of work?

No one I know of ever believed that absolutely nothing you did outside of work should ever result in you're being fired
from your job. For instance, if someone works at a daycare center, and then is arrested and convicted for exposing
themselves to young children, it is pretty clear that that job should not be waiting for them when they get out of
prison.



Looking back to Eich's case, if instead of just disagreeing with the legalization of gay marriage, he had posted on
social media "death to all the gays" we have a completely different story: now, gay coworkers really would have a good
reason to feel unsafe around this person. A company would be perfectly justified in firing someone who posted this. (And
if the poster responded that "I was just joking," then they should be fired for being too stupid to hold any serious
job.)

Similarly, if a healthcare worker like Salinas repeatedly and openly advocates the death of people who disagree with her
politics, that is a pretty good sign that she should be removed from any medical position where she might have any
influence on their health or well-being. That is a lot different than if she had merely said "I think Trump is an awful
president," or "the Supreme Court is making bad decisions," or " I completely disagree with the Republican Party's
platform." if that had been what she were up to, and someone tried to get her fired, then at least I would certainly
agree that it was a hypocritical employment of cancer culture by the right, after they had criticized it on the part of
the left. But the repeated advocacy of violence in her tweets puts them in a whole different ballpark than merely
strongly disagreeing with certain policies.

In short, I would strongly object to the firing of any person from a pro-Trump company simply because they strongly
objected to the politics of Trump, or musk, or the Republican Party.


